---
title: 2025-04-21 è¯•å·
author: Anonymous
layout: post
category: exam
---

---

## è¯•å·

{% pro %}

(20points).

1. (10 points). Assume that $p$ is a prime number greater than 2. Prove that the polynomial  

    $$
    f (x) = x^{p-1} + x^{p-2} + \cdots + x + 1
    $$

    is irreducible in the rational number field $â„š$.

2. (10 points). For an integer coefficient polynomial

    $$
    f (x) = x^{n} + a_1 x^{n-1} + \cdots + a_{n-1} x + a_{n},
    $$

    the sufficient and necessary condition for $f (x)$ to have **(non-zero)** integer roots is that there are $2(n-1)$ integers $\{ b_i, c_i , \  i = 1, \ldots, n-1\}$ such that

    1. $a_i = b_i  +  c_i$, for $i = 1, \cdots, n-1$; and
    2. $\frac{1}{c_1} = \frac{b_1}{c_2} =  \frac{b_2}{c_3} = \cdots =  \frac{b_{n-2}}{c_{n-1}} =  \frac{b_{n-1}}{a_{n}}$.

{% endpro %}

---

{% pro %}

(20 points).  

1. (10 points). Assume that $a,b âˆˆ â„‚$ are two complex numbers. Prove the following two subspaces of $â„‚[x]$,  

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    & V_a=\{f(x) \in \mathbb{C}[x] \mid f(a)=0\}, \\[6pt]
    & V_b=\{g(x) \in \mathbb{C}[x] \mid g(b)=0\} ,
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    are isomorphic.
2. (10 points). Assume that $Îµ_1, Îµ_2, Îµ_3$ is a basis of the linear space $V$, and $f_1, f_2, f_3$ is the dual basis of $Îµ_1, Îµ_2, Îµ_3$. Let  

    $$
    Î±_1=Îµ_1+Îµ_2+Îµ_3,\quad {Î±}_2=Îµ_2+Îµ_3,\quad {Î±}_3=Îµ_3.
    $$

   1. Prove that $Î±_1, Î±_2, Î±_3$ is a basis of $V$;
   2. Find the dual basis of $Î±_1, Î±_2, Î±_3$ (using $f_1, f_2, f_3$ to represent).

{% endpro %}

---

{% pro %}

(20 points). Suppose $V$ is an $n$-dimensional vector space over a number field, and let $V_1, V_2, \ldots, V_s$ be $s$ proper subspaces of $V$. Prove that

1. There exists some $Î± âˆˆ V$ such that $Î± âˆ‰ V_1 âˆª V_2 âˆª \cdots âˆª V_s$;

2. There exists a basis of $V, Îµ _1, Îµ _2, \ldots, Îµ _n$, such that

   $$
   \left\{Îµ _1, Îµ _2, \ldots, Îµ _n\right\} â‹‚ \left(V_1 âˆª  V_2 âˆª  \cdots âˆª  V_s\right)=âˆ….
   $$

{% endpro %}

---

{% pro %}

(15 points). Suppose $Ï† _1, Ï† _2, \ldots, Ï†_m$ are linear maps over the $n$-dimensional vector space $V$, such that  

$$
Ï† _i^2 = Ï† _i\quad  \text{and}\quad  Ï† _i Ï† _j = 0 \quad (i â‰  j, \ 1 â‰¤ i, \ j â‰¤ m).
$$

Prove that

$$
V=\operatorname{im} \varphi_1 âŠ• \operatorname{im} \varphi_2 âŠ• \cdots âŠ• \operatorname{im} Ï†_m âŠ• \bigcap_{i=1}^m \operatorname{ker} Ï†_i .
$$

{% endpro %}

---

{% pro %}

(15 points). Suppose the linear map $ğ’œ (X)=AXA^T$ over $â„^{n Ã— n}$, where $A$ is an $n$-order real square matrix with $\operatorname{rank}(A) = r$. Find the dimension and a basis of $\operatorname{im} ğ’œ$.  

{% endpro %}

---

{% pro %}

(10 points). *You are encouraged to have a great amount of reading and thinking besides the classes. This problem is meant to test the your understanding.*
Please give a new theorem/question that has neither appeared in classes nor in our textbook, and then give a proof/solution to this theorem/question.
It can be a phenomenon you have summarized, a theorem in other books, or a theorem that is beyond what we have learned.

{% endpro %}
